Medieval warfare had no shortage of
brutal weapons,
but some of the most terrifying were
siege engines built for one purpose,
breaking castles.
These tools of destruction, designed to
batter walls, breach gates, and force
even the strongest fortresses to
surrender, ranged from simple tactics to
[music] devastating machines of war.
We've spent hundreds of hours
researching, modeling, and
reconstructing them to show exactly how
they looked and operated in the medieval
world.
My name is Ben, and this is
Deconstructed.
For centuries, castles dominated the
landscape.
They controlled territory, protected
rulers, stored [music] wealth, and
projected authority.
From the 11th century onward, castles
spread across Europe, evolving from
simple timber fortifications into
massive stone strongholds.
Thick curtain walls, fortified
gatehouses, and flanking [music] towers
transformed them into some of the most
formidable defensive structures of the
medieval world.
As these fortifications grew more
advanced, capturing them demanded
equally specialized methods.
A siege is the process of surrounding
and isolating a fortified position,
either to force its surrender or to
breach its defenses.
Over time, sieges became central to
medieval warfare, shaping the control of
land and resources, but they came at a
high cost, requiring immense time,
money, and manpower.
We specifically focused on how sieges
were carried out in medieval Europe
toward the end of the High Middle Ages
and into the Late Middle Ages, roughly
the 13th and 14th centuries.
The castle shown here is a simplified
representative model inspired by real
European castles of the period,
incorporating a water-filled moat and
key defensive features typical of the
era.
Castles were often built on elevated
terrain, hills, cliffs, or mountains,
making them even harder to attack.
For this demonstration, however, the
surrounding terrain has been kept flat,
allowing us to clearly show how these
brutal siege devices were used during an
assault.
But a siege didn't typically begin with
an attack. It actually began with
something seemingly unmedieval.
When an army first arrived, negotiations
often came first, an opportunity to
avoid the cost of a prolonged conflict.
If no agreement was reached, the
attackers would establish a camp and
secure their position around the castle,
cutting off supplies and reinforcements.
This camp became their fortified base
for the duration of the siege.
A defensive perimeter of wooden palisade
was typically erected around it.
Inside, soldiers slept, stored supplies,
>> [music]
>> and built siege engines.
Setting up camp marked the true
beginning of the siege, not with
violence, but with pressure.
In many cases, the attackers simply
waited.
Rather than risk a costly assault, they
relied on time to do the work for them.
Sieges could last for months, even
years, as food ran out, water became
scarce,
>> [music]
>> and disease began to spread within the
walls.
Most siege engines were not brought
ready-made.
Instead, they were assembled on site.
Essential materials, such as iron
fittings, ropes, and tools, were
transported with the army, while large
quantities of timber were sourced
locally.
Armies had often marched for weeks to
reach their target, setting up far from
home in unfamiliar territory.
There was little privacy, and after a
long day of preparing for an assault,
there wasn't exactly much to unwind and
definitely no way to catch up on your
favorite shows from back home.
Today, the setting may be different, but
that kind of exposure hasn't gone away,
especially when you're traveling or
using public Wi-Fi. That's where NordVPN
comes in.
When you connect to the internet without
protection, your data can be visible to
others on the same network, whether
that's hackers, trackers, or anyone
trying to monitor your activity.
NordVPN encrypts your internet
connection, turning your data into
unreadable information before it leaves
your device.
Even if someone tries to intercept it,
they won't be able to see what you're
doing.
It's a simple step, but it can make a
big difference when you're connecting
through networks you don't control.
Instead of trusting that a public
connection is safe, NordVPN helps make
sure your information stays protected
from the start.
It also hides your IP address, keeping
your location and identity private.
And if you're traveling, it lets you
access content as if you were back home,
so you're not locked out of the services
you normally use.
So, whether you're on public Wi-Fi, at a
hotel, or even sieging a castle
somewhere, it adds a layer of protection
between you and anyone trying to access
your information. Try NordVPN and get an
exclusive discount on a two-year plan
plus four extra months for free at
nordvpn.com/deconstructed
with a 30-day money-back guarantee.
Back at the castle, when things
escalated, attackers had to take the
risk and close the distance.
With that shift, the siege entered a
more dangerous phase.
Machines like the battering ram and the
siege tower were brought forward, each
built to overcome a specific obstacle
and push the attack closer to the walls,
crossing one of the most lethal zones,
the open ground before the castle.
Fully exposed, advancing soldiers came
under constant attack from above as
arrows, bolts, and stones rained down
from the battlements.
From behind the walls, this fortified
position gave defenders a decisive
advantage, allowing a relatively small
force to hold off an army many times its
size.
To counter this, advancing troops were
supported by archers and other ranged
weapons tasked with suppressing
defenders on the walls.
Archers themselves were protected by
portable wooden shields known as
mantlets, from which they could fire
safely toward the battlements.
Some were mounted on wheels, allowing
them to be repositioned as the attack
progressed.
The next obstacle was the moat, a
water-filled barrier designed to keep
both troops and siege engines at a
distance.
To cross it, attackers filled sections
with earth, stones, timber, and
brushwood.
It was slow, dangerous work carried out
under constant threat from above.
To protect those working, attackers used
mobile sheds on wheels, often called
penthouses, cats, or tortoises.
These timber-framed structures shielded
soldiers from incoming projectiles as
they pushed forward, dumped material
into the moat, and withdrew to [music]
repeat the process.
Their roofs were often covered in raw
hides to prevent fire from taking hold.
Once enough material had been placed,
soldiers could cross the filled section,
often laying additional planks to
support heavier equipment.
With that, the attackers could finally
begin to close in on the castle walls.
The main gate was typically the weakest
point in a castle's defenses, and often
the primary target.
But, it was also the most heavily
defended.
In castles with moats, [music] the
drawbridge would be raised, blocking
access entirely.
Once a crossing had been established,
attackers brought forward one of the
oldest siege weapons in history, the
battering ram.
Used since ancient Egypt, it consisted
of a heavy wooden log suspended by ropes
or chains within a mobile covered frame,
protecting the soldiers operating it.
Very similar to the mobile shed used to
fill the moat.
The front of the log was often [music]
tapered to a point and reinforced with
iron to maximize impact and prevent
splitting.
Before reaching the gate, attackers
first had to deal with the drawbridge.
Under cover, they would swing the ram
rhythmically back and forth to break or
collapse it.
Once down, the ram could be brought
against the main gate, where sustained
blows would eventually break it open.
But even then, the danger wasn't over.
To get through the gatehouse, soldiers
had to leave the protection of cover and
enter the narrow gate passage, funneled
into a kill zone where defenders
attacked from arrow slits and murder
holes above.
Inside, attackers often encountered
portcullises, heavy grills blocking the
passage.
They could try to burn or lift them, but
success was far from guaranteed.
This is why assaults were often launched
on multiple fronts.
Another approach was far simpler,
ladders.
Attackers would rush the walls, raise
ladders, and climb directly into combat.
It was fast, but incredibly dangerous.
Soldiers remained fully exposed, and
defenders [music] could push ladders
away or strike down those climbing.
A more advanced solution was the siege
tower or belfry, which appeared around
the same time as the battering ram,
making them one of the earliest siege
engines.
These large mobile wooden structures
[music] allowed soldiers to reach the
height of the battlements while
remaining protected.
Constructed on site, they were typically
rectangular and built to match or
slightly exceed the height of the castle
walls.
Mounted on four or more wheels, the
tower could be rolled toward the castle
across planks laid over the ground and
the filled moat.
It was usually pushed from behind,
though in some cases ropes or pulleys
were used with teams of men or oxen
pulling it forward.
Inside, multiple levels connected by
ladders allowed soldiers to climb to the
top.
At the upper level, a drawbridge
operated by a winch could be lowered
onto the battlements, creating a direct
path onto the wall walk for soldiers to
attack defenders.
From here, attackers could surge onto
the walls while archers positioned at
the top level of the tower suppressed
[music] defenders during the final
approach.
Like the movable sheds we saw earlier,
the tower's exterior was covered with
raw hides to reduce the risk of fire.
By this point, attackers had developed
ways to cross the moat, breach the gate,
and scale the walls, each step bringing
them closer.
But the most powerful siege engines were
designed to do something more ambitious,
break the castle's defenses from a
distance.
And this coordinated assault inspired us
to create a detailed poster illustrating
the different siege methods and machines
used to break through castle defenses.
Grab yours through the link in the
description. We're also giving one away.
For a chance to win one, like this
video, subscribe, and comment below.
Which siege weapon surprised you the
most? We'll announce the winner in the
next video.
And a quick shout-out to our last
giveaway winner. Congratulations.
Catapults were used to launch
projectiles from a distance, and both
attackers and defenders made use of them
during sieges.
These machines were classified by how
they stored and released energy, most
commonly through torsion, tension, and
later gravity, evolving over centuries
and finally culminating in the most
powerful of them all, the counterweight
trebuchet.
The earliest of these were
torsion-powered engines, beginning with
the ballista.
Originally developed by the ancient
Greeks, the ballista remained in use for
nearly 2,000 years.
It was designed to launch projectiles
such as stones or large bolts over long
distances with a high degree of
accuracy.
These machines varied significantly in
size,
>> [music]
>> from small portable versions operated by
two men to large engines requiring crews
of around eight, capable of launching
stones weighing up to 30 kg over
distances exceeding 400 m.
The ballista was built around a central
wooden beam with a groove that guided
the projectile.
At the rear, the projectile rested
against a string connected to two wooden
arms.
Each arm was inserted into tightly
twisted skeins of cord fixed to the
frame.
These cords acted as torsion springs,
storing potential energy as the arms
were drawn back.
Mounted on the central beam was a
sliding block fitted with a claw
mechanism that gripped the string.
To prepare for launch, a winch at the
rear pulled the sliding block backward
using a rope.
As it moved, it drew the string with it,
pulling the arms back and gradually
increasing the stored energy in the
system.
As the block was drawn back, a ratchet
and pawl mechanism prevented it from
moving forward until release.
Once fully drawn, the projectile was
placed into the groove along the beam.
The ballista was then aimed by raising
or lowering it using a hinged arm that
engaged with notches on the supporting
frame below.
To launch, a trigger lever was pulled.
The claw pivoted upward releasing the
string.
The arm snapped forward driving the
string ahead and propelling the
projectile toward the target.
After each shot, the system was reset
and prepared again.
Following the fall of the Western Roman
Empire, ballistas gradually fell out of
use in Western Europe during the early
Middle Ages, though some variants
continued in certain regions.
One such variant, the springald, was
built for castle defense. Compact in
form, yet devastating against troops
approaching the walls.
To uncover what gave it its edge and how
it differed from a ballista, we've
created a dedicated deep dive video
available exclusively to our YouTube and
Patreon members.
Ballistas were eventually replaced by
the simpler and cheaper onager.
Also powered by torsion, it is the type
of catapult most people recognize,
though its operation differs from common
assumptions.
Developed by the Romans in the 3rd
century BCE, it was used primarily to
throw projectiles like stones over walls
rather than directly at personnel.
Depending on its size, it typically
required a crew of up to eight men to
operate and could launch stones weighing
up to around 45 kg over distances
exceeding 300 m.
The onager was built around a heavy
wooden frame with a rigid vertical
support at one end.
At its core was a single arm inserted
into a thick skein of twisted cord fixed
to the [music] frame using the same
torsion principle as the ballista.
At the end of the arm was either a bowl
or a sling to hold the projectile.
The sling was a later improvement that
increased the effective length of the
arm, giving the machine greater range.
One end of the sling was fixed to the
arm, while the other ended in a ring
placed onto a metal pin at the tip of
the arm.
The angle of that pin determined when
the ring slipped free during launch,
releasing the projectile.
To prepare for launch, the arm was
hauled down with a winch and rope,
gradually increasing the stored energy
in the system.
As the arm was drawn back, a ratchet and
pawl mechanism prevented it from
snapping forward too soon.
Once fully drawn, the projectile was
loaded.
To launch it, the crew pushed forward a
lever which doubled as the pawl,
releasing the arm.
The arm then snapped forward with
tremendous force.
If fitted with a sling, the sling opened
at the peak of the swing, launching the
projectile through the air.
The arm then slammed into a padded stop
before being reset for the next shot.
Like the ballista, the onager gradually
fell out of use in Western Europe during
the early Middle Ages.
And just like its predecessor, onagers
were replaced by the next invention, the
traction trebuchet.
Unlike torsion-powered engines, this was
a tension-powered system using human
force pulling a rope to generate the
tension needed to launch the projectile.
It was first developed in China in the
4th century BCE and introduced to
Western Europe around the 6th century.
Traction trebuchets were used to throw
projectiles such as stones and varied
widely in size.
>> [music]
>> From small anti-personnel versions
operated by a few men to large machines
operated by hundreds, capable of
launching stones weighing up to around
50 kg over distances of roughly 150 m.
The design was simple, but highly
effective, allowing it to launch
projectiles faster than the
torsion-powered systems we explored
earlier.
It consisted of a long wooden arm
mounted on a frame, pivoting around a
central axle.
Ropes were attached to the shorter end
of the arm, while the longer end carried
a sling holding the projectile.
To prepare for launch, the long end of
the arm was lowered, and the projectile
was placed into the sling.
To launch it, a team of soldiers pulled
down sharply and in unison on the ropes.
This downward force caused the long arm
to swing upward at high speed, whipping
the sling forward until it released the
projectile toward the target.
The traction trebuchet remained the
primary ranged siege weapon in Western
Europe until the 12th century, when it
was gradually replaced by a more
powerful design.
However, it continued to be used
particularly as an anti-personnel
weapon.
The evolution of siege engines
culminated in the most destructive of
them all, the counterweight trebuchet.
Unlike the traction trebuchet, which
relied on human force, this machine used
gravity to generate immense power.
It first appeared around the
Mediterranean in the 12th century.
The trebuchet's projectile could vary
widely, stones, burning materials, or
even rotting carcasses used to spread
disease, but was most commonly a large
stone.
Its primary role was to break down walls
through sustained bombardment. [music]
A large trebuchet required dozens of men
to operate, and could launch stones
weighing over 100 kg over distances of
up to 300 m.
Like earlier designs, it consisted of a
long wooden arm mounted on a heavy
frame, pivoting around a central axle.
At the shorter end of the arm was a
large hinged wooden box, typically
filled with stones acting as a
counterweight.
The longer end carried a sling holding
the projectile.
At the base of the frame was a guide
chute, which supported the projectile in
the sling before each shot.
To prepare for launch, the long end of
the arm was pulled downward using a
winch, raising the counterweight into
the air.
Once in position, a locking lever held
the arm in place.
The winch ropes were then detached and
set aside.
The projectile was placed into the
sling, resting on the guide chute.
To launch, a rope attached to the
locking lever was pulled.
This released the counterweight, which
dropped under gravity.
As it fell, it drove the short end of
the arm downward, causing the long end
to swing upward with tremendous speed.
The sling accelerated forward, releasing
the projectile toward the target.
Trebuchets could weaken a castle through
repeated strikes, but thick stone walls
were built to withstand punishment.
So, attackers often turned to another
way of bringing them down, not by
breaking through the wall, but by
digging beneath it.
One of the most effective methods of
breaching a castle's defenses was
undermining.
Sapphires, or workers, dug tunnels
beneath the walls, [music] supporting
them temporarily with wooden props.
These supports were then set on fire
using brushwood and other combustible
materials to intensify the flames,
causing the tunnel to collapse, and with
it, the section of wall above.
This created a breach for attackers to
enter the castle.
Defenders sometimes countered this by
digging their own tunnels to intercept
or collapse the attackers' work.
In castles protected by water-filled
moats, mining became far more difficult,
as water seepage could flood the tunnels
before they reach their target.
By the 14th century, a new weapon began
to change the balance of siege warfare.
Large-caliber cannons known as [music]
bombards started to appear.
Unlike earlier engines, these weapons
used gunpowder to fire heavy
projectiles, delivering far greater
destructive power than even the largest
trebuchets.
Early bombards launched a massive stone
balls, sometimes weighing over 100 kg,
before later transitioning to iron shot.
They were typically mounted on heavy
wooden frames set directly on the ground
with the rear braced by timber to absorb
the force of recoil.
To protect the crew, the cannon was
positioned behind wooden mantlets,
shielding them from incoming
projectiles.
In front of the weapon, a hinged wooden
shield could be raised to fire, then
lowered again to protect the crew as
they reloaded.
By the 15th century, the increasing
power of these weapons began to render
traditional siege weapons and the
tactics built around them obsolete.
But breaking into a castle was only half
the story.
The real challenge was that castles were
not just walls.
They were layered systems filled with
controlled entry points, elevated firing
positions, [music]
and built-in defense mechanisms designed
to turn every step forward into a deadly
[music] mistake.
To understand why these fortresses were
so difficult to defeat in the first
place, watch our full breakdown of how
medieval castles were actually
constructed.
Thanks for watching. Stay curious.